but something I know you're really
interested in and shared I guess a I
don't want to say a common enemy a good
friend of both of us but someone we
philosophically disagree with and
Richard Dawkins makes a very similar
argument and so do a lot of the new
atheists they their mode of operation is
parody they go let's take the principles
of theism of religious belief and show
how they actually lead to absurdity so
one of them is like if God created the
world then God wouldn't be simple but
really Lex so you don't really get
anywhere I don't think that's a good
argument we can leave that aside the
more popular version of that argument is
when people like Dawkins say if we look
at scripture what we see is a God not
just doing good things but drowning
people giving them plagues and
instructing people to commit genocide
and he says even if that is fiction this
is still an evil character like coella
DeVille it might be the worst character
that's ever been written in
says Dawkins you see different versions
of this too the late great Dan dennet
gave the example of
supermanisdeadvevo Jesus are a lot more
entertaining than the Superman films
that have been made but the point is
that if you take these parodies
seriously you find asymmetries the
Flying Spaghetti Monster is not a
similarly reasonable hypothesis as the
good God hypothesis because spaghetti is
something that exists inside time and
space these are fun taglines this is the
new atheist game mock make fun try and
reduce it to absurdity without doing any
proper philosophy and I think this is
what's happened with this argument in
professional philosophy of religion
known as the evil God challenge it goes
well let's assume for the sake of
argument that you've got good arguments
to think that your God is benevolent
powerful knowledgeable and exists well
what makes you think that hypothesis is
any more reasonable than my hypothetical
one which is that God's the same but is
evil through and through you ask you
know what kind of definition can we give
give of evil there and I suppose all the
definitions of evil they try and give
are flipped on their head so to speak
but let's ignore like the the emotions
and pleasure pain and suffering that
would I think fall under like a creation
theology like you look at the world and
as we agreed earlier in our main
discussion you can look at all the
happiness and pleasure pain and
suffering and you can't quite judge
whether on the whole the world is good
or bad just on those things but then
we've got other areas of theology
Revelation and perfect being so if we
ask ourselves what would the greatest
being be like is goodness a great making
property I.E something we strive for as
individuals or is evil something we
strive for well if your friend tells you
they're going to go and cheat on their
wife and beat up a child in the park you
explain them reasons why they shouldn't
do that you help them see the truth of
the matter it seems like the reasonable
great making property is goodness and
not evil similarly and I'll just give
this one as an example cuz I think it's
really obvious let's take Dawkins
example of scripture give him the
benefit of the doubt let's say that in
scripture God historically did these bad
things and these good things a real
controversial premise I know but give
him the benefit of the doubt his
argument still won't work what you have
is good and evil actions but then you've
also got these explicit and teleological
statements about God's intentions and
God's motivations no one is good apart
from God Alone God has plans to prosper
you not fault you like this being has
this hypothesis this harmonical approach
has the extra benefit of these explicit
statements but then it goes one further
because you can contextualize these evil
actions in the light of God's intentions
and God's character as revealed in
scripture so you end up having three
points to the good God hypothesis and
one point for the evil God hypothesis
and what I do in the book is um and not
telling people to go out and buy the
book it's ridiculously priced at £85 I
think that's an evil and an of itself
pick up flosses on God for a tenner if
you're interested in learning some more
on philosophy of religion but what I do
in the book is I painstakingly go
through all of the arguments and show
that there is a massive cumulative case
that if God exists God is good and I get
a lot of people saying like you believe
like like you keep getting asked as well
Jordan do you believe in God right
you've just had two bucks come on God
people assume that I'm this theist I'm
trying to convert people I think we
should give the best Arguments for
atheism if we're going to be atheists
but that's not one of them this isn't a
good argument just run the problem of
evil it's it's it's a classic for a
reason well the other thing too that
that we should take Serious stalk of is
that a naively good spaghetti monster in
the sky let's say would be a justly
parody character now one of the things
that you can't say about the Old
Testament authors was that they were
naive they're not naive now the great
Heroes of the Old Testament Corpus
they're not good people when they start
like they might have an upward striving
instinct or a calling let's say or a
prod of conscience but they do what they
can to fight it and they suffer along
the way and they produce an awful lot of
Misery the human characters in the Old
Testament are very realistic they're
very multi-dimensional now the same can
be said for the characterization of God
and I can understand why Dr Dawkins for
example objects to the cataclysmic
roughness of the biblical accounts but
what we also have to understand is that
they had to contend for example with the
ethics of
War now if the atheist types had a
better answer to the ethics of War than
the Old Testament Corpus then Dawkins
point would be well taken but they don't
so now and there's other things I think
that Dr Dawkins doesn't understand about
the biblical Corpus too is that the the
force against which the chosen people
strive in the Old Testament Corpus it's
always the descendants of Cain well
Canaanites it's always the descendants
of Cain this actually means something
from a literary perspective it means
that those who climb Jacob's Ladder will
and should be victorious over those who
uh fail to make the proper sacrifices
who are bitter resentful arrogant
usurpers because those are the
descendants of Kain and this is an
eternal struggle it's laid out in the
antithesis between Cain and Abel which
is really the first historical story in
the biblical Corpus because of course
the story of Adam and Eve takes place in
Paradise itself and so the war that God
is fighting let's say on behalf of the
chosen people is a war against evil now
then you might say well what's the
morality of a war against evil and the
answer to that is
well set the situation up to begin with
so that evil doesn't Prevail that means
that you walk in the pathway of the
truth and that you say like Jonah did
what is on your conscience and that you
walk upward Jacob's Ladder now let's say
you failed to do that and the forces
that produce the flood Mount or the
forces that produce the totalitarian
state of the Tower of Babel arise and
you find yourself in the midst of a
complete bloody catastrophy well then
maybe all you have left open to you are
bad
choices and so I mean we think that the
second world war was a just War All
Things Considered well that doesn't make
it a Paradis desirable situation I also
don't think it's something that you can
lay at the feet of God you know if it is
the case that human beings have the
choice between good and evil and it is
the case that we have something to do
that's
real then the consequences of our
failure to abide by the divine order are
real and not only real real but
cataclysmically real and I happen to
think that that's true there's no fting
that off on God not you know there's a
balance there we have something
important to do and we have Choice the
world's real and we have agency okay one
of the consequences of that is that we
can bring evil into the world now that's
a different question than is there evil
implicitly in the world you know the the
battle for life and death that
characterizes existence those are
separate questions human beings can gen
genuinely bring evil into the world is
evil is the world evil in its Essence
what's the answer to that if you assume
that and act in consequence you'll make
it worse now I know that's a
consequentialist argument it's not the
only argument but it's not a bad one to
begin with
[Music]